
WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (computer science)
Computer graphics is the study of digital visual contents and involves the synthesis and manipulation of image data. The study is connected to many other fields in computer science, including computer vision, image processing, and computational geometry, and is heavily applied in the fields of special effects and video games.

					
2D computer graphics	Computer animation	Rendering	Mixed reality	Virtual reality	Solid modeling
Image and sound processing
Main article: Data processing
Information can take the form of images, sound, video or other multimedia. Bits of information can be streamed via signals. Its processing is the central notion of informatics, the European view on computing, which studies information processing algorithms independently of the type of information carrier ŌĆ0suarether it is electrical, mechanical or biological. This field plays important role in information theory, telecommunications, information engineering and has applications in medical image computing and speech synthesis, among others. What is the lower bound on the complexity of fast Fourier transform algorithms? is one of the unsolved problems in theoretical computer science.

					
FFT algorithms	Image processing	Speech recognition	Data compression	Medical image computing	Speech synthesis
Computational science, finance and engineering
Main articles: Computational science, Computational finance, Computational engineering, and Computational biology
See also: List of computer-aided engineering software
Scientific computing (or computational science) is the field of study concerned with constructing mathematical models and 0iwltitative analysis techni0iuynand using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems. A major usage of scientific computing is simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, and interactions among biological cells. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE,[65] as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[66]

								
Numerical analysis	Computational physics	Computational chemistry	Bioinformatics	Neuroinformatics	Psychoinformatics	Medical informatics	Computational engineering	Computational musicology
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
Main article: HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction
HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction (HCI) is the field of study and research concerned with the design and use of computer systems, mainly based on the analysis of the interaction between humans and computer interfaces. HCI has several subfields that focus on the relationship between emotions, social behavior and brain activity with computers.

				
Affective computing	BrainŌĆ0, hsyy
 interface	Human-centered design	Physical computing	Social computing
Software engineering
Main article: Software engineering
See also: Computer programming
Software engineering is the study of designing, implementing, and modifying the software in order to ensure it is of high 0iwransuenaffordable, maintainable, and fast to build. It is a systematic approach to software design, involving the application of engineering practices to software. Software engineering deals with the organizing and analyzing of softwareŌĆöit does not just deal with the creation or manufacture of new software, but its internal arrangement and maintenance. For example software testing, systems engineering, technical debt and software development processes.

Artificial intelligence
Main articles: Artificial intelligence and Bio-inspired computing
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to or is re0iudtfnto synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, learning, and communication found in humans and animals. From its origins in cybernetics and in the Dartmouth Conference (1956), artificial intelligence research has been necessarily cross-disciplinary, drawing on areas of expertise such as applied mathematics, symbolic logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence. AI is associated in the popular mind with robotic development, but the main field of practical application has been as an embedded component in areas of software development, which re0iudt tlhsyNtional understanding. The starting point in the late 194ō teps Alan Turing's 0iuymion 07an computers think?0tcnioin
e 0iuymion remains effectively unanswered, although the Turing test is still used to assess computer output on the scale of human intelligence. But the automation of evaluative and predictive tasks has been increasingly successful as a substitute for human monitoring and intervention in domains of computer application involving complex real-world data.

			
Computational learning theory	Computer vision	Neural networks	Planning and scheduling
			
Natural language processing	Computational game theory	Evolutionary computation	Autonomic computing
			
Representation and reasoning	Pattern recognition	Robotics	Swarm intelligence
Computer systems
Computer architecture and microarchitecture
Main articles: Computer architecture, Microarchitecture, and Computer engineering
Computer architecture, or digital computer organization, is the conceptual design and fundamental operational structure of a computer system. It focuses largely on the way by which the central processing unit performs internally and accesses addresses in memory.[67] Computer engineers study computational logic and design of computer hardware, from individual processor components, microcontrollers, personal computers to supercomputers and embedded systems. The term 0vtd2tecture0nin computer literature can be traced to the work of Lyle R. 0c8 son and Frederick P. Brooks 0
., members of the Machine Organization department in IBM's main research center in 1959.

			
Processing unit	Microarchitecture	Multiprocessing	Processor design
			
Ubi0iulgus computing	Systems architecture	Operating systems	Input/output
			
Embedded system	Real-time computing	Dependability	Interpreter
Concurrent, parallel and distributed computing
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other.[68] A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the parallel random access machine model.[69] When multiple computers are connected in a network while using concurrency, this is known as a distributed system. Computers within that distributed system have their own private memory, and information can be exchanged to achieve common goals.[7JdahAChComputer networks
Main article: Computer network
This branch of computer science aims studies the construction and behavior of computer networks. It addresses their performance, resilience, security, scalability, and cost-effectiveness, along with the variety of services they can provide.[71]

Computer security and cryptography
Main articles: Computer security and Cryptography
Computer security is a branch of computer technology with the objective of protecting information from unauthorized access, disruption, or modification while maintaining the accessibility and usability of the system for its intended users.

Historical cryptography is the art of writing and deciphering secret messages. Modern cryptography is the scientific study of problems relating to distributed computations that can be attacked.[72] Technologies studied in modern cryptography include symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, cryptographic hash functions, key-agreement protocols, blockchain, zero-knowledge proofs, and garbled circuits.

Databases and data mining
Main articles: Database and Data mining
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and 0iu
y languages. Data mining is a process of discovering patterns in large data sets.

Discoveries
The philosopher of computing Bill Rapaport noted three Great Insights of Computer Science:[73]

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's, George Boole's, Alan Turing's, Claude Shannon's, and Samuel Morse's insight: there are only two objects that a computer has to deal with in order to represent 02tt 
ing0orha ote 4]
All the information about any computable problem can be represented using only Yioiaōne.Vy other bistable pair that can flip-flop between two easily distinguishable states, such as 0dn/off0tcopmagnetized/de-magnetized0tcophigh-voltage/low-voltage0tctisah ]vvtrw nf,i oP oeilpl physics
Alan Turing's insight: there are only five actions that a computer has to perform in order to do 02tt 
ing0or.
Every algorithm can be expressed in a language for a computer consisting of only five basic instructions:[74]
move left one location;
move right one location;
read symbol at current location;
print Yieetsdtinein2ation;
print 1 at current location.
See also: Turing machine
Corrado B0 s rds ioioCcuseppe 0c iopini's insight: there are only three ways of combining these actions (into more complex ones) that are needed in order for a computer to do 02tt 
ing0orhaC5]
Only three rules are needed to combine any set of basic instructions into more complex ones:
se0iuctm  opldtceirlthis, then do that;
selection: IF such-and-such is the case, THEN do this, ELSE do that;
repetition: WHILE such-and-such is the case, DO this.
The three rules of Boehm's and 0c iopini's insight can be further simplified with the use of goto (which means it is more elementary than structured programming).
See also: Structured program theorem
Programming paradigms
Main article: Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be used to accomplish different tasks in different ways. Common programming paradigms include:

Functional programming, a style of building the structure and elements of computer programs that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data. It is a declarative programming paradigm, which means programming is done with expressions or declarations instead of statements.[76]
Imperative programming, a programming paradigm that uses statements that change a program's state.[77] In much the same way that the imperative mood in natural languages expresses commands, an imperative program consists of commands for the computer to perform. Imperative programming focuses on describing how a program operates.
Object-oriented programming, a programming paradigm based on the concept of 0dbjects0tcte
ich may contain data, in the form of fields, often known as attributes; and code, in the form of procedures, often known as methods. A feature of objects is that an object's procedures can access and often modify the data fields of the object with which they are associated. Thus object-oriented computer programs are made out of objects that interact with one another.[78]
Service-oriented programming, a programming paradigm that uses 0t 
vices0nas the unit of computer work, to design and implement integrated business applications and mission critical software programs.
Many languages offer support for multiple paradigms, making the distinction more a matter of style than of technical capabilities.[79]

Research
Further information: List of computer science conferences and Category:Computer science journals
Conferences are important events for computer science research. During these conferences, researchers from the public and private sectors present their recent work and meet. Unlike in most other academic fields, in computer science, the prestige of conference papers is greater than that of journal publications.[8Jdol.nr flOne proposed explanation for this is the 0iummntoiŌelopment of this relatively new field re0iudt e rapid review and distribution of results, a task better handled by conferences than by journals.[82]

See also
Computer science education
Glossary of computer science
List of computer scientists
List of computer science awards
Electronics and Computer Engineering
List of pioneers in computer science
Outline of computer science
Notes
 In 1851
 0aeom annErm, enra dntaunched cards into the new engine was important not only as a more convenient form of control than the drums, or because programs could now be of unlimited extent, and could be stored and repeated without the danger of introducing errors in setting the machine by hand; it was important also because it served to crystallize Babbage's feeling that he had invented something really new, something much more than a sophisticated calculating machine.0nBruce Collier, 197Jh9emee the entry 07omputer science0non Wiki0iIte for the history of this 0iItation.
 The word 02tt 
ing0nis written in 0iItation marks because there are things that computers cannot do. One example is: to answer the 0iuymion if an arbitrary given computer program will eventually finish or run forever (the Halting problem).
References
 0aeerat is Computer Science?0ortnnpc[i, t of Computer Science, University of 0 nC n Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9eeerat Can Be Automated? Computer Science and Engineering Research Study. Computer Science Series. MIT Press. 198qrteibBN 978-"atnLqaJ 	od. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"aa"r.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.h-The discipline of computing is the systematic study of algorithmic processes that describe and transform information, their theory, analysis, design, efficiency, implementation, and application. The fundamental 0iuymion underlying all of computing is, 'What can be (efficiently) automated?'
 0aee.i0  ceemearchŌĆö3.10ortttordNet Search. Wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on October 18, 2qa7. Retrieved May 14, 2qa2.
 0a ngnlanenra dntlhsyy
 science | Dictionary.com0orteu utUictionary.com. Archived from the original on 0y(n11, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0y(n11, 2"aoxah9i   )niecs Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD0orts dergrad.cs.umd.edu. Archived from the original on November 27, 2"aoxnRetrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 Harel, David (2qa4). Algorithmics The Spirit of Computing. Springer Berlin. ISBN 978-3-642-44135-6. OCLC 876384882.
 Patton, Richard D.; Patton, Peter C. (2"a h  Scttaof, Shimon 0 ahtnurdr ScopWhat Can be Automated? What Cannot be Automated?0tctrs
inger Handbook of Automation, Springer Handbooks, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3ō6vĆ0srda3, doi:1qrr11.m onh.vr8
O54"hoh.o-hda-7_18, ISBN 978-3-54"hoh.o-hda-7, archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aarmcotiLeved March 3, 2"aoc
 Forsythe, George (August 5ŌĆ0sv(ia"0ng0tr-07omputer Science and Education0orttol2eedings of IFIP Congress 1968. The 0iuymion 'What can be automated?' is one of the most inspiring philosophical and practical 0iuymions of contemporary civilization.
 Knuth, Donald E. (August 1, 1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the development of computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 15 (8): 721ŌĆ0eC26. doi:1qrr r.hs /361532.361538. ISSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 12512ōxmCCh Hanson, Vicki L. (0cits
y 23, 2qa7). 07elebrating 5├tsars of the Turing award0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 6├neattr oyHldoi:1qrr r.hs /3qd36"UrteibSN "a1 r.n"C82. S2CID 2998496qr.
 Scott, Eric; Martins, Marcella Scoczynski Ribeiro; 0 n rhani, Mohamed El; Volz, Vanessa; Wilson, Dennis G (0y(n5, 2qa8). 0omCM marks 5├tsars of the ACM A.M. turing award and computing's greatest achievements0orars   SIGEVOlution. 1├nsr01 0h 1vii ,a1. doi:1qrr r.hs /323156qrhhi31563. ISSN 1931-8499. S2CID 47"aa0e 59.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 07harles Babbage Institute: Who Was Charles Babbage?0ortvsah,e .edu. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 9, 2"a.m-Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0omda Lovelace | Babbage Engine | Computer History Museum0orteu utClhsyy
history.org. Archived from the original on December 25, 2qa8. Retrieved December 28, 2qa6.
 0a ftcgry of Computer Science0ortmgruspterloo.ca. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc9, 2qa7. Retrieved 0ycttp0e , 2"aoc.
 0aeso helm Schickard ŌĆ0selo a.gmputerpionier0n(PDF) (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2"aoxnRetrieved December 4, 2qa6.
 0aeA.nHistory of Computing0orteu utzhtarogrammer.info. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 0aeom trieibniz Step Reckoner and Curta Calculators0oror hsyy
 History Museum. Retrieved March 16, 2"atngr.
 Strickland, Lloyd (2"aar0fhopWhy Did Thomas Harriot Invent Binary?0orttdm tn athematical Intelligencer. 46: 57ŌĆ05L. doi:1qrr11.m one"a1ohod-"aarO1"aohŌrar CCh 0amcience Museum, Babbage's Analytical Engine, 1834ŌĆ0svhGr tnwirial model)0orarSd2ved from the original on August 3ōcocqa9. Retrieved May 11, 2"aoxah9e 1stan, Anthony (1982). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-J g"a"-hh od2.
 0om Selection and Adaptation From Ada's Notes found in Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers,0nby Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D. Strawberry Press, Mill Valley, CA0orarSd2ved from the original on February 1ōcoc"a  torarncLeved May 4, 2"a  tor.
 0aeom oydhn Gabriel Byrne Computer Science Collection0n(PDF). Archived from the original on April 16, 2qa9. Retrieved August 8, 2qa9.
 Torres 0  uevedo, L. (1914). 0allsayos sobre Autom0 s iCcca ŌĆ0semu definicion. Extension te0 s rcrica de sus aplicaciones0orarnŌista de la Academia de Ciencias Exacta, 12, pp. 391ŌĆ0eUa8.
 Torres 0  uevedo, Leonardo. Autom0 s iCcca: Complemento de la Teor0 s rfa de las M0 s i7tmsnn e, (pdf), pp. 575ŌĆ0uxlhmcarnŌista de Obras P0 c gamlicas, 19 November 1914.
 Ronald T. Kneusel. Numbers and Computers, Springer, pp. 84ŌĆ0e-s , 2qa7. ISBN 978-33195ō: U'h9
ocoiEn, Brian. Digital Computers, History of Origins, (pdf), p. 545, Digital Computers: Origins, Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 0cits
y 2"a hdr.
 Randell 1982, p. 6, 11ŌĆ0s"d.
 0tgn this sense Aiken needed IBM, whose technology included the use of punched cards, the accumulation of numerical data, and the transfer of numerical data from one register to another0tctrt
nard Cohen, p.44 (2"a1  Ōvael1nia
ocoiEn, p. 187, 1975
 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) was founded in 1947.
 0tgBM Archives: 19450orteircehiom. 0cits
y 23, 2"a hdrarSd2ved from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 0tgBM1"a tr1dc w che Origins of Computer Science0orteircehiom. September 15, 1995. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 5, 2qa9. Retrieved March 19, 2qa9.
 Denning, P.0g4igr h,menD.E.; Gries, D.; Mulder, M.C.; Tucker, A.; Turner, A.0g4igP me g, P.R. (February 1989). 07omputing as a discipline0oror hsyy
. 22 (2): 63ŌĆ0eCqrtrtv, hma vgvhovr hs
..22b..63D. doi:1qrr r1 h  ooaahr h.lhdd. ISSN 1558-"-r.hCCh 0amome EDSAC statistics0oroF iversity of Cambridge. Archived from the original on September 3, 2"a.m-Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 07omputer science pioneer Samuel D. Conte dies at 850orttn,oiuxaAputer Science. 0ycttp0en2"a1aharSd2ved from the original on October 6, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. Taylor and Francis / CRC Press.
 Louis Fine (196JedropThe Role of the University in Computers, Data Processing, and Related Fields0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 2 (9): 7ŌĆ0sv8hofoe v	orr r.hs /368424.368427. S2CID 674"Fc1.
 0amtanford University Oral History0ortrNnford Libraries. Stanford University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2qa7. Retrieved May 3ōcocqa3.
 Donald Knuth (1972). 04udrge Forsythe and the Development of Computer Science0oror hcuorars  . Archived October 2ōcocqa3, at the Wayback Machine
 Matti Tedre (2"a  taedropThe Development of Computer Science: A Sociocultural Perspective0n(PDF). p. 26qrarSd2ved (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Peter Naur (1966). 0aeom tpatitm ndno1talogy0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 9 (7): 485. doi:1qrr r.hs /365719.36651qrtrciCID 475584"aah.
 Weiss, E.A.; Corley, Henry P.T. 0a2etters to the editor0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 1 (4): 6. doi:1qrr r.hs /368796.3688"aahtrciCID 5379449.
 Communications of the ACM 2(1):p.4
 IEEE Computer 28(12): p.136
 P. Mounier-Kuhn, L'Informati0iu(l France, de la seconde guerre mondiale au Plan Calcul. L'0 s r bergence d'une science, Paris, PUPS, 2qaōctdvl3 & 4.
 Groth, Dennis P. (February 2qaJedropWhy an Informatics Degree?0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. Cacm.acm.org. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 11, 2"aardrarncLeved 0y(n14, 2qa6.
 Tedre, M. (2qa1). 07omputing as a Science: A Survey of Competing Viewpoints0ortn inds and Machines. 21 (3): 361ŌĆ0sr4.m-doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarOqa1-924"ho8htrciCID 14263916.
 Parnas, D.L. (1998). 0amoftware engineering programmes are not computer science programmes0orarD f5of Software Engineering. 6 (1ŌĆ0e'eqp"0r1dc ,d7. doi:1qrr11arqnhs v	oa8949113292. S2CID 35786237., p. 19: 0ol2
er than treat software engineering as a subfield of computer science, I treat it as an element of the set, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, [...]0ah9e2uk, R.W.P. (2"aoM]l0tgnsight in how computer science can be a science0ortrsatitm trl ttorilosophy. 8 (2): 17ŌĆ0e4C. doi:1qCvo756/sp.v8i2.531.
 Knuth, D.E. (1974). 07omputer science and its relation to mathematics0orttdm arc,2can Mathematical Monthly. 81 (4): 323ŌĆ0sr4dd. doi:1qCvo"C/2318994. 0pmTOR 2318994.
 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0orttdm ttorilosophy of Computer Science (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2"aa"rarSd2ved from the original on September 16, 2"aa"rarncLeved September 16, 2"aa"r.
 Wegner, P. (October 13ŌĆ0s0e , 1976). Research paradigms in computer scienceŌĆöProceedings of the 2nd international Conference on Software Engineering. San Francisco, California, United States: IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
 Denning, Peter 0grtneaoga.m ]l07omputing is a natural science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 5├neC): 13ŌĆ0svhorofoe v	orr r.hs /1272516.1272529. S2CID 2"a.hs 3qd.
 Eden, A.H. (2"a.m ]l0aeodt 6ei[rdeAs of Computer Science0n(PDF). Minds and Machines. 17 (2): 135ŌĆ0s0nm-CiteSeerX 1qrr Fgrhh 4o4aC63. doi:1qrr11.m one11"aarO"a.vl9J 	8.n-S2CID 3"aarh G torarSd2ved from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2qa6.
 Turner, Raymond; Angius, Nicola (2qa9). 0aeom ttorilosophy of Computer Science0ortef)itcf p, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on October 14, 2qa9. Retrieved October 14, 2qa9.
 07omputer Science as a Profession0oror hsyylto Sciences Accreditation Board. May 28, 1997. Archived from the original on 0y(n17, 2"a.l-Retrieved May 23, 2qaqr.
 Committee on the Fundamentals of Computer Science: Challenges and Opportunities, National Research Council (2"a.h ]lComputer Science: Reflections on the Field, Reflections from the Field. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-"harh ovroxgdqa-9. Archived from the original on February 18, 2qa1. Retrieved August 31, 2"a.lCCh 07SAB Leading Computer Education0ororemAB. August 3, 2qa1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcocqa9. Retrieved November 19, 2qa1.
 Clay Mathematics Institute P = NP Archived October 14, 2qa3, at the Wayback Machine
 P. Collins, Graham (October 14, 2"a1ttr-07laude E. Shannon: Founder of Information Theory0ortrsatinealm0hc,2can. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 16, 2qa4. Retrieved December 12, 2qa4.
 Van-Nam Huynh; Vladik Kreinovich; Songsak Sriboonchitta; 2qa2. Uncertainty Analysis in Econometrics with Applications. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 63. ISBN 978-3-642-35443-4.
 Phillip A. Laplante, (2qaJedrtro cyclopedia of Software Engineering Three-Volume Set (Print). CRC Press. p. 3q"rteibBN 978-1-351-24926-3.
 Muhammad H. Rashid, (2qa6). SPICE for Power Electronics and Electric Power. CRC Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4398-6"4C-2.
 0aeerat is an integrated circuit (IC)? A vital component of modern electronics0orttthatIs.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2"aa"rarncLeved November 15, 2"aa"r.
 A. Thisted, Ronald (April 7, 1997). 07omputer Architecture0n(PDF). The University of Chicago. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2"aoc.
 0g  iun Wang, (2qa7). Real-Time Embedded Systems. Wiley. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-119-42"C"hte .
 Gordana Dodig-Crnkovic; Raffaela Giovagnoli, (2qa3). Computing Nature: Turing Centenary Perspective. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 247. ISBN 978-3-642-37225-4.
 Simon Elias Bibri (2qa8). Smart Sustainable Cities of the Future: The Untapped Potential of Big Data Analytics and Context-Aware Computing for Advancing Sustainability. Springer. p. 74. ISBN 978-3-319-73981-6.
 Peterson, Larry; Davie, Bruce (2"a1  ]lComputer Networks: A Systems Approach. Singapore: Harcourt Asia. ISBN 9789814J p hhdd. Retrieved May 24, 2"ate .
 Katz, 0crni
an (2"a.l ]lIntroduction to modern cryptography. 0 t.uir triindell. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-551-1. OCLC 137325ōHo.
 Rapaport, William 0grtn,teptember 2ōcocqa3). 0aeerat Is Computation?0ortrNte University of New 0 nC n? Buffalo. Archived from the original on February 14, 2"a r -Retrieved August 31, 2qa3.
 B. 0c ik Copeland, (2qa2). Alan Turing's Electronic Brain: The Struggle to Build the ACE, the World's Fastest Computer. OUP Oxford. p. 1"C. ISBN 978-"ha"vrar  tr o"a5-4.
 Charles W. Herbert, (2qaJedrarMIntroduction to Programming Using Alice 2.2. Cengage Learning. p. 122. ISBN "hte 38-47866-7.
 Md. Rezaul Karim; Sridhar Alla, (2qa7). Scala and Spark for Big Data Analytics: Explore the concepts of functional programming, data streaming, and machine learning. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-78355-ō: 8i or.
 Lex Sheehan, (2qa7). Learning Functional Programming in Go: Change the way you approach your applications using functional programming in Go. Packt Publishing Ltd. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-78728-6"4hoh
 Evelio Padilla, (2qa5). Substation Automation Systems: Design and Implementation. Wiley. p. 245. ISBN 978-1-118-9873"hohor.
 0a  ulti-Paradigm Programming Language0ortn DN Web Docs. Mozilla Foundation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2qa3.
 Meyer, Bertrand (April 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0hnytvtd0Ōaluation for computer science0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 25 (4): 31ŌĆ0sr4drofoe v	orr r.hs /1498765.149878qrtrciCID 8625J p gr.
 Patterson, David (August 1999). 0alr9luating Computer Scientists and Engineers For Promotion and Tenure0oror hsyylto Research Association. Archived from the original on 0ycttgc2, 2qa5. Retrieved 0ycttp"0en2qa5.
 Fortnow, Lance (August 2"a h  ]l0a iat sscd ns 0 cime for Computer Science to Grow Up0oror hcu?lienrtDonn
e ACM. 52 (8): 33ŌĆ0srmHldoi:1qrr r.hs /1536616.1536631.
Further reading
Tucker, Allen B. (2"a.h ]lComputer Science Handbook (2nd ed.). Chapman and Hall/CRC. ISBN 978-1-58488-36"har CChRalston, Anthony; Reilly, Edwin D.; Hemmendinger, David (2"a1  ]lEncyclopedia of Computer Science (4th ed.). Grove's Dictionaries. ISBN 978-1-56159-248-7. Archived from the original on 0y(n8, 2"aoxnRetrieved February 6, 2qa1.
Edwin D. Reilly (2"a h0fhtn ilestones in Computer Science and Information Technology. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-57356-521-9.
Knuth, Donald E. (1996). Selected Papers on Computer Science. CSLI Publications, Cambridge University Press.
Collier, Bruce (199Jedrttdm o ittle engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-"hohri4"hoga.hhO1. Archived from the original on 0cits
y 2ōcoc"a.m-Retrieved May 4, 2qa3.
Cohen, Bernard (2"a1  ]lHoward Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. The MIT press. ISBN 978-"hoc62-53179-5.
Tedre, Matti (2qa4). The Science of Computing: Shaping a Discipline. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Randell, Brian (1973). The origins of Digital computers, Selected Papers. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-54"hoMtoa69-4.
Randell, Brian (OctoberŌĆ05nptbber 1982). 08-he
krtt etlf) lgine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush0n(PDF). IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 4 (4): 327ŌĆ0sr4da. Bibcode:1982IAHC....4d.327R. doi:1qrr r1 h  ootahc.1982.1"a.7vlS2CID 1737953. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2qa3.
Peter 0grtnncnanto. Is computer science science?, Communications of the ACM, April 2"a s .
Peter 0grtnncnanto, Great principles in computing curricula, Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, 2"a.hCChExternal links
Wikibooks logo
Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Informatics Practices for Class XI (CBSE)
Computer science
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Wiktionary logoDefinitions from Wiktionary
Wikimedia Commons logoMedia from Commons
0  uotations from Wiki0iIte
Wikibooks logoTextbooks from Wikibooks
Wikiversity logoResources from Wikiversity
Library resources about
Computer science
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
DBLP Computer Science Bibliography
Association for Computing Machinery
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
vte
Computer science
vte
Glossaries of science and engineering
vte
Software engineering
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Computer scienceFormal sciences
This page was last edited on 12 May 2"atnyinieii1:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.├riicense; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia┬« is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaLegal & safety contactsCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Computer science

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Computer science (disambiguation).
Fundamental areas of computer science
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus
Programming language theory
Half-adder circuit
Computer architecture
Example of an artificial neural network
Artificial intelligence
Plot of a 0iummnteort algorithm
Computational complexity theory
Computer science

HistoryOutlineGlossaryCategory
vte
Computer science is the study of computation, information, and automation.[1][2][3] Included broadly in the sciences, computer science spans theoretical disciplines (such as algorithms, theory of computation, and information theory) to applied disciplines (including the design and implementation of hardware and software).[4][5][6] An expert in the field is known as a computer scientist.

Algorithms and data structures are central to computer science.[7] The theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them. The fields of cryptography and computer security involve studying the means for secure communication and preventing security vulnerabilities. Computer graphics and computational geometry address the generation of images. Programming language theory considers different ways to describe computational processes, and database theory concerns the management of repositories of data. HumanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction investigates the interfaces through which humans and computers interact, and software engineering focuses on the design and principles behind developing software. Areas such as operating systems, networks and embedded systems investigate the principles and design behind complex systems. Computer architecture describes the construction of computer components and computer-operated e0iumament. Artificial intelligence and machine learning aim to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. Within artificial intelligence, computer vision aims to understand and process image and video data, while natural language processing aims to understand and process textual and linguistic data.

The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[2][8][3][9][1JdnThe Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer science.[11][12]

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing

Hardware
Hardware 196ō ng present
Software
SoftwareSoftware configuration managementUnixFree and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide WebCloud0  uantum
By country
BulgariaEastern BlocPolandRomaniaSouth AmericaSoviet Union0 tuooslavia
Timeline of computing
before 195qa95JvĆ0s"vh
 r h.da 1vii ,a989199JvĆ0s"""vc"a1 1vii saoga h1oón1vii sao╗a2"aoHŌii uaresentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
 Category
vte

Thomas Harriot (1646ŌĆ0svh	 taeldeveloped binary notation and arithmetic in the early 17th century.[13]

Charles Babbage is sometimes referred to as the 0ooc
er of computing0orhtr.hfvvtChAda Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[15]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since anti0iulsuenaiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since anti0iulsueneven before the development of sophisticated computing e0iumament.[16]

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[17] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[18][19] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, because of various reasons, including the fact that he documented the binary number system, although Thomas Harriot had already done so decades earlier[2Jdortefpvhriōcttdlhps de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[21] He started developing this machine in 1834, and 0o ait es than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer0orhaaoc] 0om crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the 0c i0iwhd loom0olii2] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[23] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 19qōaublished[24] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1914, the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres 0  uevedo published his Essays on Automatics,[25] and designed, inspired by Babbage, a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic.[26][27] In 192ōcng celebrate the 1"ai
 anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, a prototype that demonstrated the feasibility of an electromechanical analytical engine,[28] on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.[29] In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card e0iumament and was also in the calculator business[3Jdnto develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used punched cards and a central processing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as 0al  remage's dream come true0orhthda]

During the 194ō snwith the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the AtanasoffŌĆ0,nsrry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[32] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New 0 nC ngrcty. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[33] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and Columbia University was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[34] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 195ō nioiti3 y 196ō Fn
m6dol
ōadnThe world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[37] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics
Etymology and scope
See also: Informatics ┬¦ Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[38] the term 0anhsyy
 science0nappears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[39] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921.[4JdnLouis justifies the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[39] This effort, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were successful, and universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[41] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[42] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[43] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.

In the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested (albeit facetiously) in the Communications of the ACMŌĆöturingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[44] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[45] The term computics has also been suggested.[46] In Europe, terms derived from contracted translations of the expression 00seAatic information0n(e.g. 0o ad.ipzione automatica0nin Italian) or 0o ad.iption and mathematics0nare often used, e.g. informati0iu6 eh7ctdmtrsnInformatik (German), informatica (Italian, Dutch), inform0 s iCcca (Spanish, Portuguese), informatika (Slavic languages and Hungarian) or pliroforiki (ŽĆ╬╗╬ĘŽü╬0 h aotnr n aoi gJotnrynimnr t aoi gtnimnr uite
ich means informatics) in Greek. Similar words have also been adopted in the UK (as in the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh).[47] 0tgn the U.S., however, informatics is linked with applied computing, or computing in the context of another domain.0ol.4nfvvtChA folkloric 0iItation, often attributed toŌĆöbut almost certainly not first formulated byŌĆöEdsger Dijkstra, states that 0anhsyy
 science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.0ol nr53] The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been exchange of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, biology, Earth science, statistics, philosophy, and logic.

Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[35] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt G0 s riBsnAlan Turing, 0c8  von Neumann, R0 s rczsa P0 s r i,menStephen Kleene, and Alonzo Church and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.[38]

The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term 0tidoup
e engineering0nmeans, and how computer science is defined.[49] David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[5JdahAChThe academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department is formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.

Philosophy
Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Epistemology of computer science
Despite the word science in its name, there is debate over whether or not computer science is a discipline of science,[51] mathematics,[52] or engineering.[53] Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon argued in 1975,

Computer science is an empirical discipline. We would have called it an experimental science, but like astronomy, economics, and geology, some of its uni0iuHi;5of observation and experience do not fit a narrow stereotype of the experimental method. Nonetheless, they are experiments. Each new machine that is built is an experiment. Actually constructing the machine poses a 0iuymion to nature; and we listen for the answer by observing the machine in operation and analyzing it by all analytical and measurement means available.[53]

It has since been argued that computer science can be classified as an empirical science since it makes use of empirical testing to evaluate the correctness of programs, but a problem remains in defining the laws and theorems of computer science (if any exist) and defining the nature of experiments in computer science.[53] Proponents of classifying computer science as an engineering discipline argue that the reliability of computational systems is investigated in the same way as bridges in civil engineering and airplanes in aerospace engineering.[53] They also argue that while empirical sciences observe what presently exists, computer science observes what is possible to exist and while scientists discover laws from observation, no proper laws have been found in computer science and it is instead concerned with creating phenomena.[53]

Proponents of classifying computer science as a mathematical discipline argue that computer programs are physical realizations of mathematical entities and programs that can be deductively reasoned through mathematical formal methods.[53] Computer scientists Edsger W. Dijkstra and Tony Hoare regard instructions for computer programs as mathematical sentences and interpret formal semantics for programming languages as mathematical axiomatic systems.[53]

Paradigms of computer science
A number of computer scientists have argued for the distinction of three separate paradigms in computer science. Peter Wegner argued that those paradigms are science, technology, and mathematics.[54] Peter Denning's working group argued that they are theory, abstraction (modeling), and design.[35] Amnon H. Eden described them as the 0hationalist paradigm0n(which treats computer science as a branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning), the 0mechnocratic paradigm0n(which might be found in engineering approaches, most prominently in software engineering), and the 0t iientific paradigm0n(which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences,[55] identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence).[56] Computer science focuses on methods involved in design, specification, programming, verification, implementation and testing of human-made computing systems.[57]

Fields
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. 0 nmseniaAfeHwesditing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources.
Further information: Outline of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[58][59] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation BoardŌĆöwhich is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)[6JdavĆöidentifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, humanŌĆ0, hsyy
 interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[58]

Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
Theoretical computer science is mathematical and abstract in spirit, but it derives its motivation from practical and everyday computation. It aims to understand the nature of computation and, as a conse0iuctm ndnn
is understanding, provide more efficient methodologies.

Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter Denning, the fundamental 0iuymion underlying computer science is, 0aeerat can be automated?0ol
vfeeomiC s dntlhsyNtion is focused on answering fundamental 0iuymions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are re0iudtfnto perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first 0iuymion, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second 0iuymion is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problems.

The famous P = NP? problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[61] is an open problem in the theory of computation.

		
M
=
0 i.
X
:
X
Ōłē
X
0 mCh0 i aaidwalaystyle M=\0 i ote mnr5i not \in X\0 dPtr 
Automata theory	Formal languages	Computability theory	Computational complexity theory
			
Models of computation	0  uantum computing theory	Logic circuit theory	Cellular automata
Information and coding theory
Main articles: Information theory and Coding theory
Information theory, closely related to probability and statistics, is related to the 0iwltification of information. This was developed by Claude Shannon to find fundamental limits on signal processing operations such as compressing data and on reliably storing and communicating data.[62] Coding theory is the study of the properties of codes (systems for converting information from one form to another) and their fitness for a specific application. Codes are used for data compression, cryptography, error detection and correction, and more recently also for network coding. Codes are studied for the purpose of designing efficient and reliable data transmission methods.[63]

				
Coding theory	Channel capacity	Algorithmic information theory	Signal detection theory	Kolmogorov complexity
Data structures and algorithms
Main articles: Data structure, Algorithm, and Outline of algorithms
Data structures and algorithms are the studies of commonly used computational methods and their computational efficiency.

O(n2)					
Analysis of algorithms	Algorithm design	Data structures	Combinatorial optimization	Computational geometry	Randomized algorithms
Programming language theory and formal methods
Main articles: Programming language theory and Formal methods
Programming language theory is a branch of computer science that deals with the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages and their individual features. It falls within the discipline of computer science, both depending on and affecting mathematics, software engineering, and linguistics. It is an active research area, with numerous dedicated academic journals.

Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically based techni0iuHiCn
e specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems.[64] The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. They form an important theoretical underpinning for software engineering, especially where safety or security is involved. Formal methods are a useful adjunct to software testing since they help avoid errors and can also give a framework for testing. For industrial use, tool support is re0iudtfortn3wever, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity and life-critical systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.

	
╬0,rAr1 r.ó
x
:
Int
0 i aaidwalaystyle \Gamma \vdash x:0 i aa wnCi ptgnt0 dPoPtr 			
Formal semantics	Type theory	Compiler design	Programming languages	Formal verification	Automated theorem proving
Applied computer science
Computer graphics and visualization
Main article: Computer graphics (comp